Add a book page on project organization (#2185)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/learn/book/modular-architecture/project-organization.md

+++
title = "Project Organization"
insert_anchor_links = "right"
[extra]
weight = 1
+++

As your Bevy project grows, storing it all in a single `main.rs` file will become frustrating!
But how should you split it apart, and what are your tools for doing so?

> Thankfully, the answers to these questions are pretty simple:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thankfully, the Bevy community has answers to these questions:
```

purpose of change: remove "simple".

- split your code based on the "domain" it covers
  - think about where you might want to reuse, or selectively disable bits of functionality
  - code that changes together should live together
  - splits like "world generation" and "combat" and "main menu" are great

>   - don't organize your modules by e.g. "components" and "systems"!

Reviewer 2: I'm not terribly opinionated on this one, but for what its worth I have structured most of my Bevy projects this way & prefer to keep related components types together as I find that most components don't fit perfectly in most groupings.
On the other hand with systems, while I don't put them in a systems module, they do usually reside as private fns within a plugin module, except for the unusual system that is used across multiple plugins.

I suppose this structure may be controversial but I wanted to share my experience nonetheless for at least another data point to consider!

Author: I think that's a reasonable point; let me try to re-explain this. I've seen people with web backgrounds (I think) repeatedly trying to do `root/components` which is a complete disaster. 

I want to discourage that specifically!

Reviewer 2: Ah that makes a lot of sense!

- don't try to get it right from the very start
  - split things up gradually, as areas become complex and unwieldy
  - you'll have a much better idea of the shape of your program then
  - and it stops you from wasting time at the start of your project
- take advantage of Rust's modules, crates and visibility to organize your code
  - be mindful of [orphan rules] when architecting multi-crate projects
- one [plugin] per module, and one plugin per crate (which may nest multiple plugins) is a good default
  - placing these at the top of your files can act as a simple, consistent "table of contents"

[orphan rules]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/implementations.html#orphan-rules
[plugin]: ./plugins.md

## Modules

Rust's [module system] is flexible and easy to use,
allowing you to split code across files.

Generally, we find that splitting files that are beyond about 1000 lines is
about the right size for Rust and Bevy projects.
Too small and you'll end up constantly swapping between files,
and too large and finding code within a file becomes frustrating.

Modules within files aren't particularly useful,

> but they can be used to control visibility, or enable code folding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but they can be used to control visibility, enable code folding, and are commonly used for tests.
```

[module system]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch07-02-defining-modules-to-control-scope-and-privacy.html

## Crates

As your project grows even further,
you should consider splitting it into multiple [crates] using [workspaces].

> Using crates is helpful when reusing code between projects,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using crates is helpful when reusing code between projects, formalizing APIs for specific domains,
```

The Crates section talks a decent amount about performance, but I think its worth connecting it back to the continued stair-step from main -> main/lib -> modules & plugins -> crates -> crates you use across your own projects -> publishing crates on crates.io, which can be thought of as a growing formalization of a given domain's API. "this is my splash screen" -> "this is the splash screen I use on all my projects" -> "this is a splash screen I made for others to use in their projects"

[`cargo build --timings`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/timings.html

## Item Visibility

Rust allows you to carefully restrict which code can see various items and structs.
This is known as [visibility], and the details are explained well in the linked reference.

For a game, thinking about visibility may feel like overkill.
We want to iterate fast! Mess about! Find the fun!
You might even be the only person on your team!

And that's largely right: game programming often warrants a more fluid, permissive approach.
But there's still a few good reasons to take advantage of Rust's visibility system:

- carefully maintaining invariants
  - simple validated getter/setter patterns are very effective
  - more complex patterns can often benefit from custom commands or system params to ensure a single blessed workflow
  - clean encapsulation ensures that you can update how something works in a single place
- dead code detection
  - if your types/methods/functions are `pub`, Rust won't known if they're dead code
  - dead code slows down compile times, confuses the reader and slowly rots
- keeping your code *reasonably* untangled

>   - iterating quickly is important, so you should be careful not to get too tangled up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - iterating quickly is important, and Rust will help you refactor, so you should be careful not to get too tangled up
```

  - forcing consumers to do things the right way makes it easier to change the internals later

At the end of the day, `pub(crate)` is a good default visibility level for items in larger projects.

> Internal methods, invariants, and implementation details should be private.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internal methods, invariants, and implementation details should be private, which is the Rust language default behavior.
```

+++
title = "Project Organization"
insert_anchor_links = "right"
[extra]
weight = 1
+++

As your Bevy project grows, storing it all in a single `main.rs` file will become frustrating!
But how should you split it apart, and what are your tools for doing so?

Thankfully, the Bevy community has answers to these questions:

- split your code based on the "domain" it covers
  - think about where you might want to reuse, or selectively disable bits of functionality
  - code that changes together should live together
  - don't try to group together objects by "kind", like "components" and "systems"
- don't try to get it right from the very start
  - split things up gradually, as areas become complex and unwieldy
  - you'll have a much better idea of the shape of your program then
  - and it stops you from wasting time at the start of your project
- take advantage of Rust's modules, crates and visibility to organize your code
  - be mindful of [orphan rules] when architecting multi-crate projects
- one [plugin] per module, and one plugin per crate (which may nest multiple plugins) is a good default

>   - placing these at the top of your files can act as a simple, consistent "table of contents"

Reviewer 3: I like the opposite: simple items followed by the items that depend on them. The plugin is the crescendo of the story told by the file. It's easier to parse the code that way for me.

I like [this write-up](http://number-none.com/blow/john_carmack_on_inlined_code.html) by John Carmack.

Author: Very defensible, but I'm going to stick to this style, which we use in the engine and ourv examples :)
